“... if you take any world problem, any issue on the planet -- the big ones, peace, the environment, poverty—the solution to that problem certainly includes education, could even be just education, and, if you have a solution that doesn’t include education it's not a solution at all.” --Nicholas Negroponte.

This is our lovely machine, but the project is not ABOUT computers. Although the computer gets all the press and all the excitement OLPC is about children and learning. The computer is the finger; the Children are the moon. --Seymour Papert (강조는 김창준)

This is our lovely machine, but the project is not ABOUT computers. Although the computer gets all the press and all the excitement OLPC is about children and learning.

The computer is the finger; the Children are the moon.

Laptops are both a window and a tool: a window into the world and a tool with which to think. They are a wonderful way for all children to learn learning through independent interaction and exploration. What is the alternative for education? The laptop is cheaper than two or three ordinary textbooks, but gives access to the entire wealth of information on the Internet(참고로, 네그로폰테가 캄보디아에서 발견한 것은 종이의 비용이 무척 높았다는 것이며, 장기적으로 볼 때 랩탑이 종이보다 훨씬 저렴했다는 점입니다 -- 예를 들어 60GB짜리 아이포드 하나에 대략 4MB짜리 책을 집어넣는다고 하면 1만권이 넘는 책이 들어가고, 사람이 하루에 한권씩 읽는다고 해도 40년이 넘게 걸리는 분량의 책을 담을 수 있고, 그 비용은 비교할 수 없을만큼 저렴합니다. --김창준). This is for children who cannot walk to a library, and are out of range of any kind of television, educational, commercial, or otherwise. ... It should be mentioned, that a common criticism of the project, is to say that what poor people need is food and shelter, not laptops. This comment however is ignorant of conditions in improvished nations around the world. While it is true there are many people in the world who definetly need food and shelter, there are many multitudes of people who live in rural or sub-urban areas and have plenty to eat and reasonable accommodations. What these people don't have, is a decent shot at a good education.