The words or the language, as they are written or spoken, do not seem to play any role in my mechanism of thought. The psychical entities which seem to serve as elements in thought are certain signs and more or less clear images which can be "voluntarily" reproduced and combined. ... But taken from a psychological viewpoint, this combinatory play seems to be the essential feature in productive thought -- before there is any connection with logical construction in words or other kinds of signs which can be communicated to others. The above mentioned elements are, in my case, of visual and some of muscular type. Conventional words or other signs have to be sought for laboriously only in a second stage, when the mentioned associative play is sufficiently established and can be reproduced at will. The Mathematician's Mind, A Testimonial from Professor Einstein, pp. 142-143 에서 인용

The first step in programming is imagining. Just making it crystall clear in my mind what is going to happen. In this initial stage, I use paper and pencil, I just doodle, I don't write code. I might draw a few boxes or a few arrows, but it's just mostly doodles, because the real picture is in my mind. I like to imagine the structures that are being maintained, the structures that represent the reality I want to code. Once I have the structure fairly firm and clear in mymind, then I write the code. I sit down at my terminal -- or with a piece of paper in the old days -- and write it. --Charles Simonyi, Programmers at Work, p. 15

“One of the earliest things is to visualize this structure in my head, a dynamic structure, so I can think about how things fit together and how they work … and once I have the structure fairly strong and clear in my mind, I move it around and move around inside it, examining it and tweaking it … ” “I think of these systems of relationships as alive, interacting beings … I make this dirty dynamic mental representation, a sort of organic thing … ” "Visualization of the code is primary for me; visualization allows for more global, higherlevel thinking; [I] “visualize” graphically my programs which lets me “see” them, create them, and modify them; [the] program becomes easier to visualize; find a solution to a problem visually."