피면접자의 최소 퍼포먼스가 드러나도록 하는 면접

피면접자의 최대 퍼포먼스가 드러나도록 하는 면접

피면접자에게 어떤 숨겨진 단점이 있는가를 찾기 위해 면접

피면접자에게 어떤 숨겨진 장점이 있는가를 찾기 위해 면접

Organizations have a gravity, the weight is constantly being pushed into being problem-focused, and one has to fight it all the time. --Peter Drucker

각 조직은 자기 조직에 적절한 사람을 뽑습니다. 다른 종류의 사람은 몰아내는 항체가 있습니다.

면접을 볼 때 피면접자가 최대한 자신의 실력을 발휘하도록, 그 잠재성을 발휘하도록 도와줄 수 있습니다. 비근한 예를 몇가지 들어 볼까요? 면접관은 되도록 노트북을 쓰지 말아야 합니다. 보통 노트북을 펼쳐놓고 후보와 마주앉게 되는데, 상대방이 얼굴을 안보고 컴퓨터 화면에 집중하는 것, 키보드를 또각거리는 것 등은 후보를 상당히 불안하게, 또 산만하게 만듭니다. 또한, 될 수 있으면 동시에 많은 인원이 들어가지 않도록 하고 최대한 부드럽고 편안한 분위기를 만들어 주어야 합니다. 처음에는 피면접자가 답하기 쉬운 질문에서 시작하는 것이 좋으며, 피면접자의 정보만 취하려고 하지 말고, 가끔 면접자의 정보도 주는 것이 좋습니다. 면접관이 "사실은 저도 회사에서 일하다 보면 그럴 때가 있어요 어쩌구 저쩌구"하면서 속내 이야기도 하고 맞장구도 쳐주고 하면 훨씬 진실에 가까운 이야기를 들을 수 있습니다. 그리고 그 사람이 일을 잘 하던 상황과 비슷하게 환경을 꾸며주어서, 그 사람의 업무 실력을 가늠해 봐야 합니다. 면접 실력과 업무 실력은 큰 상관이 없을지도 모릅니다. 상당한 스트레스 환경 하에서 달변을 하는 능력이 핵심인 직무가 그리 많지 않습니다. 뛰어난 업무 능력을 가졌지만 (특히 압박) 면접 능력이 부족해서 놓치는 인재들이 무척 많습니다.

마지막으로 피터 드러커의 글을 인용하겠습니다.

The central question is not, What can this or that candidate do or not do? It is, rather, What are the strengths each possesses and are these the right strengths for the assignment? ... effective executives do not start out by looking at weaknesses. You cannot build performance on weakness. You can build only on strengths. If, for instance, a division needed an officer for a training assignment, Marshall looked for people who could turn recruits into soldiers. Usually every man who was good at this task had serious weaknesses in other areas. One was not particularly effective as a tactical commander and was positively hopeless when it came to strategy. ... Never mind, could he train recruits? If the answer was yes -- and especially if the answer was "he's the best" -- he got the job. In picking members of their cabinets, Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman said, in effect, Never mind personal weakness. Tell me first what each of them can do. It may not be conincidence that these two Presidents had the strongest Cabinets in twentieth-century U.S. history. --Peter Drucker, The Essential Drucker

The central question is not, What can this or that candidate do or not do? It is, rather, What are the strengths each possesses and are these the right strengths for the assignment? ... effective executives do not start out by looking at weaknesses. You cannot build performance on weakness. You can build only on strengths.

If, for instance, a division needed an officer for a training assignment, Marshall looked for people who could turn recruits into soldiers. Usually every man who was good at this task had serious weaknesses in other areas. One was not particularly effective as a tactical commander and was positively hopeless when it came to strategy. ... Never mind, could he train recruits? If the answer was yes -- and especially if the answer was "he's the best" -- he got the job.

In picking members of their cabinets, Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman said, in effect, Never mind personal weakness. Tell me first what each of them can do. It may not be conincidence that these two Presidents had the strongest Cabinets in twentieth-century U.S. history.

--Peter Drucker, The Essential Drucker

A manager's task is to make the strengths of people effective and their weakness irrelevant--and that applies fully as much to the manager's boss as it applies to the manager's subordinates. -- Managing for the Future: The 1990's and Beyond

A manager's task is to make the strengths of people effective and their weakness irrelevant--and that applies fully as much to the manager's boss as it applies to the manager's subordinates. -- Managing for the Future: The 1990's and Beyond